Monocyte/macrophages may harbor HIV in a nonproductive fashion for prolonged periods of time. Viral gene expression may be reactivated by stimulation of the cells with LPS or cytokines such as TNF-alpha in vitro. The effect of LPS and TNF-alpha is mediated by their ability to induce nuclear translocation of the DNA-binding heterodimer NF-kappa B (p50/p65), which binds to a specific sequence in the HIV-long terminal repeat. The present study demonstrates that triggering of complement receptors CR1 (CD35) and CR3 (CD11b/CD18) enhances viral replication in HIV-infected human monocytic cells. Monocytic cell lines and normal peripheral blood monocytes were infected with HIV-1 in vitro and cultured in the presence or absence of F(ab')2 fragments of monoclonal anti-CR1 or anti-CR3 Abs or with C3 fragments. Stimulation of CR1 or CR3 induces a two- to fourfold increase in the amount of cell-associated and released p24 Ag in cell cultures that was equivalent to that observed in control cultures triggered with LPS. We further observed that stimulation of CR1 or CR3 induces the nuclear translocation of NF-kappa B p50/p65 in infected cells. Translocation of NF-kappa B p50/p65 was also observed following stimulation of CR1 or CR3 of uninfected peripheral blood monocytes from HIV-seronegative donors. The amount of protein translocated was similar to that observed when cells were stimulated with rhTNF-alpha. TNF-alpha did not mediate the translocation of NF-kappa B p50/p65 induced by triggering of complement receptors. Taken together, these observations suggest that HIV gene expression may be activated in infected monocytes through interaction of the cells with complement-opsonized particles and that enhanced viral replication is associated with C3 receptor-mediated nuclear translocation of the NF-kappa B complex.
Lipopolysaccharide induction of tissue factor gene expression in monocytic cells is mediated by binding of c-Rel/p65 heterodimers to a kappa B-like site. 
Exposure of monocytic cells to bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activates the NF-kappa B/Rel family of proteins and leads to the rapid induction of inflammatory gene products, including tissue factor (TF). TF is the primary cellular initiator of the coagulation protease cascades. Here we report the characterization of a nuclear complex from human monocytic cells that bound to a kappa B-like site, 5'-CGGAGTTTCC-3', in the 5'-flanking region of the human TF gene. This nuclear complex was activated by LPS with kinetics that preceded induction of the TF gene. In vitro binding studies demonstrated that the TF site bound translated c-Rel and p65 homodimers but not p50/p65 heterodimers or p50 homodimers. Base-pair substitutions in the TF site indicated that the presence of a cytosine at position 1 precluded binding of NF-kappa B. In fact, under low-ionic-strength conditions, the TF complex did not migrate with translated p50/p65 dimers but instead comigrated with c-Rel/p65 dimers. Antibodies against the NF-kappa B and Rel proteins and UV cross-linking studies revealed the presence of c-Rel and p65 and the absence of p50 in the TF complex and further showed that c-Rel/p65 heterodimers selectively bound to the TF kappa B-like site. Functional studies indicated that the TF site conferred LPS inducibility on a heterologous promoter and was transactivated by c-Rel or p65. Taken together, our results demonstrated that binding of c-Rel/p65 heterodimers to a novel kappa B-like site mediated LPS induction of TF gene expression in monocytic cells.
